# 2015
Created Mon Nov 28 2016

This is the exam paper from 2015.

Rubric (e.g. Answer TWO questions. Each question is worth 25 marks; the marks for each part of a question are shown in brackets.)

1. Answer all the following parts of the question.
--------------------------------------------------

### a) Define what the Ruby Object Model is and explain how the model works when calling a user-defined method such as myRoutine() within your code. You may illustrate the model in the form of a diagram. [4]
The ruby object model is the way ruby finds objects when called. 
	
When the method myRoutine() is called
Ruby looks for myRoutine() through the receiving object’s instance methods. If found execute myRoutine()
if not found check objects class. If found execute myRoutine()
if not found check objects parent class. If found execute myRoutine()
If not found: Go back to the object and call method ‘method_missing’ if exist
If not exist: Go to object’s class, and parent’s classes
If method_missing not found:  raise a NoMethodError 


### b) In Sinatra, explain what Routes are and using an example explain how they are used. [4]
Sinatra routes are the way sinatra interprets routes used on the web to access files. For example if a user types the url domain.com/hello/world Then sinatra can load a relevent page for  /hello/world by using get '/hello/world' do
	

### c) Explain what a Hash is in Ruby. Give an example showing how to create a Hash, then store values into this Hash, and finally read values from this Hash. [6]
A hash in ruby is an ordered key value pair. 
Create hash:
id = hash.new
	
Assign a hash:
id["john"] = 5
	
Get the value:
id["john"]


### d) You are creating an app to record weather readings for home gardens. It should keep track of daily temperatures, wind speed and precipitation taken from sensors every hour. For simplicity, these readings are kept in a file and entered line by line each hour. There should be methods for recording high and low temperatures plus precipitation and wind readings, as well as weekly and monthly averages. Explain how you and your team member would develop this app using Git for source control following a Test Driven Development approach. [6]
To begin, we would all use a git repository and each work on one part of the project on seperate branches.
Using TDD each member will create tests to pass their part of the project
After the tests fail the team members will create code to pass the test.
If the tests pass they will merge it into the master branch
Then run the tests again.
If all tests pass push the changes. If not rewrite code to pass tests
Once all tests are passed we move on to the next part of the project
	
	

### e) Explain the difference between a string and a symbol in Ruby, and describe an example where you would use each in a programme. [5]
A string can change value whenever needed dynamically. A symbol is static and can never change value.
Essentially a string is a variable and a symbol is a constant.
To get the parameters of a "get" request in sinatra we would use a symbol because the value cannot change unless the url changes and the page is refreshed
We would use a string to store text that can change. For example if we are adding text to be outputed to the browser
	

2. Answer all the following parts of the question.
--------------------------------------------------

### a) You decide you want to have your own calendar application and create a suitable application that does this. You build this application using tests. There are several ways that you could do this.

#### i) Explain one way that you could test your application without installing any extra gem libraries. How would you do this only using the basic Ruby installation? [3]
Each time a new feature is created the developer can manually test that each function works as expected by inputting different values and testing to see if he gets the expected result 
	

#### ii) Explain the other way of testing your application using extra gem libraries. [3]
Using test driven development gems such as RSPEC, a developer can create automated tests and run them each time he makes a mistake. If a test fails then he has to develop code to pass the test.
	

#### iii) Explain the difference between the two ways of testing your code. Why would one be better than the other? [3]
For very small projects the first method may prove better since the time it takes to create the tests may be longer than the time required to manually test it. However in large projects using automated tests can prove to be a very valuable asset since with every change to the code you can test hundreds of features to make sure that the new code did not break anything in the application.  The main difference between the 2 methods is the time it takes to test your application after a change. In the first method it can take hours or even days depending on the size of the program and the features it has. The second method, if coded correctly, will only take a few seconds or a few minutes.


### b) Before starting to code your application, you decide that you need to include another team member to help with the work. Explain the benefits of using Git when implementing in application. [3]
If we decide to use git for version control (or any other VCS), the code will be much easier to manage and when we make changes to the code we can merge our changes automatically without having to manually look at every line of code and decide what to keep. In addition all changes made can be viewed by all users by pulling the changes to the local repo. Finally if somebody accidentally makes a mistake which ruins some functionallity it would be much easier to role back the code to a previous verison which is working.


### c) Explain why it’s better to write tests for your programs instead of relying upon watching the output in the console. [5]
By looking at the output to the console mistakes can happen much easier. For example if we have a simple calculator app and we want to see if the result is correct, the developer would have to manually check if the numbers add up. However, using tests this can be checked for us much easier.  In addition by using tests we don't have to go through all the output everytime and check that every line of the code still works. The tests can do it for us.
	

### d) Given the following Ruby code, explain what the main aspects of the code do, and any changes that you would make to improve the code. [4]

# PROGRAM: FIZZBUZZ GAME
1.upto(100) do |i|
if i % 5 == 0 and i % 3 == 0
puts "FizzBuzz"
elsif i % 5 == 0
puts "Buzz"
elsif i % 3 == 0
puts "Fizz"
else
puts i
end
end
# END PROGRAM

The above code checks for each number from 1 to 100 if the number is divisable by 5 and 3. If it is divisable by both it prints "FizzBuzz" if its only divisable by 5 "Buzz" and if only by 3 "Fizz". If it is not divisable by any it outputs the number

The following code is an improvement on the original since less checks are made:
	
1.upto(100) do |i|
output = ""
if i % 3 == 0 then 
output = "Fizz"
end
		
if i % 5 == 0 then 
output = output +  "Buzz"
puts output
break
end
if i % 3 != 0 then 
output = i
end
		
puts output
end


### e) In Ruby, define what is meant by a gem, and explain why you would use the data_mapper gem. [4]
Gems are libraries which help with creating code by reducing the amount of work needed. The data_mapper gem is very useful for editing informaiton in a database. By using the data_mapper gem the workload for accessing and understanding the information from the database is reduced
	

3. Answer all the following parts of the question
-------------------------------------------------

### a) In terms of developing Web applications using the Ruby gem Sinatra, define what type of language Sinatra is and discuss the advantages and disadvantages of using Sinatra to implement a Web application. [6]
Sinatra is an interpreted language. This means that the code is not compiled but an interprator "reads" the code to execute commands.
Sinatra allows quick and easy web development, however, for large projects sinatra may prove to be difficult since it is ment for small web projects and proof of concept projects.
Ruby on rails is better suited for larger projects however it has a steeper learning curve and longer setup time. This means Ruby is not well suited for small projects.
	

### b) Write a Ruby program to create a file ‘q2b.htm’. The program should write a simple HTML page with an <h1> heading, a line of text, a centred line of text and a paragraph break. The program should define a method make_table(xsize, ysize) which will create a table with xsize columns and ysize rows: each cell should show a string of the row and column numbers. The program should call the method to create a table, 5 rows and 6 columns. [9]
src = open('q2b.htm','w')
src.puts "<h1> header</h1>"
src.puts "some text"
src.puts "<center> Centered Text </center>"
src.puts "<br>"
	
def make_table (xsize,ysize) 
output =  "<table>"
for x in 1..xsize do
output +=  "<tr>"
for y in 1..ysize do
 output +=  "<td> #{x} #{y} </td>"
end
output +="</tr>"
end
output +="</table>"
return output
end
	
result =  make_table(5,6)
src.puts result
src.close
	
	

### c) Explain the difference between an array and a hash in Ruby, and describe an example where you would use each in a programme. [4]
An array stores a list of values which are accesable by refrences their index. Hashes are key value pairs. To access a hash you can either use its index or the key.
A hash would be used if we are trying to link user id with username.
An array would be used if we just want a list of usernames but the names do not need to be linked to an id 
	

### d) Show the results of executing the following Ruby program. [6]

puts 'W: files'
puts 'X: ' + (19 % 5).to_s
puts 'Y:'
src = open('q2file.txt','r')
s = src.readline
puts s
src.close
aa = [ ]
src = open('q2file.txt','r')
src.each do |s|
aa << s.chomp
end
src.close
puts "Z: #{aa.length}: [1] = #{aa[1]}"
	
Where q2file.txt contains three lines:
Scotland
Ireland
England
Wales

Note: the file is not 3 lines it is 4

The output would be:
W: files
X: 4
Y:
Scotland
Z: 4: [1] = Ireland

